To complete our discussion of heaps we will
see how to use heaps and DijskstraÕs algorithm,
and also how to use heaps for a different
type of sorting.
So, remember that heaps are a tree implementation
of priority queues in which insert and delete
or both of complexity log N. You can build
a heap bottom up in order N time and you can
represent it as a tree. And so you can manipulate
it in a, I am sorry, you can represent a tree
in an array, so you can manipulate it very
easily.
So, let us go back to Dijskstra's algorithm.
So, in Dijskstra's algorithm, we start with
the initial vertex and we keep burning these
vertices, right, so we keep visiting vertices
according to their distance. So, initially
we set the distance to be infinity for everything,
right. And we use the starting point as, setting
the distance to the start vertex as 0, and
then we find the smallest unvisited, vertice,
vertex, set it to be visited and recompute
the distance of each of its neighbours, right.
So, the bottlenecks were really at this part
of the loop.
So, the bottlenecks are first to find the
j with the minimum distance, right. So, the
naive implementation would take us order n
time because we would have to scan all the
unvisited vertices, which are in not in any
particular order of distance and among them
find the minimum, right. So, what seems obvious
from what we have discussed so far is that
we should maintain distance as a heap and
use delete max or actually delete min in this
case,because we will want a min heap, ok.
So, we would use delete min, but then we have
also to recompute the distance.
So, recomputing the distance means examining
every neighbour k of j. So, to make sure,
that we can look up the neighbours efficiently,
we can use adjacency lists so that we do not
waste time planning an entire row on adjacency
matrix. But the bottleneck here is, that we
need to update the distance, that is, we need
to get into the heap and change values, so
we need to update heap values. Now, we have
not really seen how to update heap values,
we have only seen insert and delete min or
delete max. So, how does update work, right.
So, supposing we want to change this value
from 12 to 44, right. If we, if we increase
this value, then with respect to its children
it cannot get any smaller, right. So, if 12
is bigger than 10 and 11, any larger value
will also be bigger than 10 and 11. So, we
make it 44. We do not have to look down, but
because we make it bigger, it can become bigger
than its parent and in fact, it does happen.
So, if we replace, 24, 12 by 44, then we find
that there is the heap violation above. So,
now, we treat this exactly like we did insert.
We look at the parent and so on. So, we fix
this violation upwards.
So, now we look and we have got 44 here and
now we have to check whether it violates anything
with its parent, and it does.
So, exchange that and finally, when it stops,
when either there are no more violations or
when we reach the root in which case we cannot
go up any further, right. So, in increasing
a value you fix violations upwards, because
in increasing a value you cannot becomes smaller
than your children, but you can become bigger
than your parent.
The other type of change is to decrease the
value. So, supposing I take this 33 and I
make it 9. Now, again by the same logic it
was 33, was smaller than 44, 9 will also be
smaller than 44. Any value smaller than 33,
cannot create a violation up. So, I must look
down, right. So, if I bring it down to 9,
the number is the problem between 33 and 24.
So, if this is my new value, I have to check
with its two children and take the biggest
one up. In this case it is 24, right.
So, now having come here, I need to now check
its two children. And now, take the biggest
one up in which case it is 11, and so this
is how it is, right. So, when I update values
and decrease the value, I have to fix violations
downwards because reducing a value cannot
make it bigger than its parent, but it can
make it smaller than one of its two children.
So, if you look at DijskstraÕs algorithm,
the way it works is, we take a vertex j and
say, update this distance, right. So, we have
to update the distance of some vertex j, which
is somewhere in the heap, right. So, what
our previous example showed us is, if we,
if we put our finger on the node in the heap
and change its value, we know how to adjust
the heap. But how do we find where j is in
the heap, right? So, where is j located? So,
we need this extra information to be kept
separately, right. So, we would keep two new
arrays pointing from the nodes, which are
one to n to the heap, which is 0 to N minus
1 and vice versa from the heap which is 0
to N to the nodes.
So, so here in this picture, right, these
two things are drawn in different colors.
So, the red labels against a node indicate
the vertex. So, 44 represents the distance
of vertex 8 and to indicate that we have an
array, saying that the NodeToHeap saying that
the node 8 in the graph is vertex 0 in the
heap. Similarly, if I look at this it says,
that this vertex is 3. So, the vertex 3 in
my graph is node 6 in my heap. Conversely,
if I am in the heap and I am if I am at node
4, which is represented loop, then which vertex
does this correspond to? So, it says, that
the node 4 in the heap corresponds to vertex
5. So, from the heap given the index of the
node in the heap, which node in the graph
does it correspond to? So, we have the extra
things which we set of and we have to update
this when we do our swaps or inserts, right.
So, now for instance, supposing we have this
previous thing and we want to make this 33
into 9.
So, our goal is to reduce 33 to 9, which we
did in the previous set. Now, let us do so.
So, now, when I do this, I need to go down
to its two children in the heap and recognize
that this 24 must change. Now, since 24 must
change, I must know also how to update it.
So, 24 is node 3 in the heap. So, node 3 is
vertex 2. So, I have to go to vertex 2 here.
So, I need to update these entries. So, I
need to update 6 and 1, and 3 and 2. So, therefore,
when I exchange 9 and 24, I must also exchange
6 and 2. I must say, that now vertex node,
vertex 2 in my graph is now at node 1 in the
tree and vertex 6 in my graph is now at node
3 in the tree. Conversely, node 1 in the tree
points to vertexes, node 3 in the tree points
to vertex, points to vertex 2, node 3 points
to vertex 6, right.
So, after this update, basically, these two
values have got exchanged from what they were
previously, ok. So, in addition to swapping
at this level, I also have to recognize that
this swap happened. Now, I do one more swap.
Because 9 and 11 had the swaps, now I will
swap the entries for 3, 6 and 8, 9. And similarly,
6, 3 and 9, 8, right. So, the entries corresponds
to vertex 6 and vertex 9 and node 3 and node
8, right. So, vertex 6, vertex 9, node 3 and
node 8, these have to be swapped, right.
So, by keeping this to extra arrays, right,
I can do these updates very easily, because
I have a way of going backwards and forwards
between the heap index, and the node index.
And unless I do this, I cannot really use
for Dijskstra's algorithm because DijskstraÕs
algorithm will ask us to update value in the
heap, but I need to know which value in the
heap I need to update. The update can be done
using this upward or downward manipulation
exactly like insert or delete max, but the
real problem is identifying where the update
starts.
So, as we saw before, now we can use this
heap with this update operation and find the
minimum time vertex and log n time. And because
we have adjacency list, right, overall the
loops updating the burn times takes log n
time per edge, and there are totally order
m edges. So, overall we get n log n for updating,
for finding the minimum n times and m log
n for updating the minimum m times. So, n
plus m log n.
You can use the similar strategy for PrimÕs
algorithm. In PrimÕs algorithm the only distance,
the notion of distance is not the same. We
do not accumulate the distance, we look at
the cost of the actual edge. But still, we
need to attract the minimum cost edge connecting
a node to a tree, to the current tree and
then we need to update these things after
we add this edge to the tree, right. So, exactly
the same idea of using a min heap with updates
we will use. So, getting PrimÕs algorithm
also down to the same complexity as DijskstraÕs
algorithm.
So, before we leave heaps, let us see how
to use heaps to sort. So, we want to sort
a list of values. So, what we can do is, we
can first build a heap, right. So, we now
start with some arbitrary sequence of values,
x 1 to x n, then we build a heap and we possibly
get reordered in some way of x i 1, x i 2,
x i n, but this is not in sorted way, this
is heap order, that is, we know, that the
maximum is at the left and so on. Now, I do
it delete max and I put this guy out, right.
So, I know that this is the maximum.
Then, after this, this something will come
to the front. At the next point, that will
come out, and then I will get the second max
and so on, right. So, if I do delete max n
times, clearly, at each point I get the next
maximum. So, I am extracting elements from
the tree in descending order, and so I get
a sorted output. I can reverse set, I can
keep in ascending order, it does not matter,
but I am just extracting the elements in a
particular order. And so this is a trivial
sorting algorithm.
Now, each extraction takes log n time because
it is a delete time delete max, right, or
a delete max or a delete min depending on
what type of heap for using. So, you do n
such extraction. So, in log n time you can
get the elements out in sorted order and to
put them in, you took only order n time. So,
overall we sorted n log n time.
There is a small subtle thing that you can
ask about this. The question is, where these
values go, right. So, initially, in the first
iteration, if I have my heap looking like
this, this is my maximum. So, it looks like
I have to put in a new list, but what happens
after this step is, that this value gets inserted
here and then it percolates down by the heapify
fix operation, right. So, when I delete the
value at the root, I take the last leaf, put
its value in the root and then I put it down
so that all the heap properties are satisfied.
And after this, now my heap only look like
this because this value is gone. So, my heap
ends with x minus n minus 1.
So, I have a place in my array, which is not
being used any more for the next delete max
because the next delete max involves only
n minus 1 operation. So, therefore, I can,
in fact, at this point go and put this value
back into the heap at this position and be
sure it is not touched, right. So, now what
will happen is, I will have the max coming
here, then I will have the next second max
coming here and so on. So, if I keep doing
delete max, I will be propagating from the
right the value in descending order and therefore,
finally, it my heap will actually end up being
resorted in ascending order, right.
So, this gives me a in place order n log n
swap, right, by just making sure, that when
I delete the value instead of throwing it
away or putting into a new list, I just put
it into the place it was vacated right now
by seeking the heap by one value, and then
I automatically get an output in sorted way,
right. So, heaps can be used to do a very
different kind of order n log n short in place.